I hate calling things bubbles, but I
think we're in a period of extreme
euphoria. Where you read and [music]
speak to investors and they say that the
numbers don't matter and the financial
statements no longer matter because this
is changing the world.
>> [music]
>> I say, "Well, I've seen this before."
You know, I saw that Nortel was changing
the world and Lucent and Cisco and 360
Networks. They were building out the
infrastructure of the internet that
we're using today.
But those companies [music] don't exist
anymore. Anthony Chilupaty is a forensic
accountant who saw what others missed,
[music] predicting the collapse of both
Valeant Pharmaceuticals and Nortel long
before it happened.
He spent decades reading what companies
don't want you to see, the footnotes.
Now, he's spotting familiar warning
signs in today's AI boom. What are the
red flags you look for? It's not red
[music] flags, we call them flammable
items. It's a three-stage process. The
first stage is
This episode of The Knowledge Project is
for informational purposes only. The
views and opinions [music] expressed by
Shane Parrish or our guests are solely
their own.
Nothing in this conversation should be
considered investment advice,
>> [music]
>> financial guidance, or a recommendation
to buy or sell any security.
Always do your [music] own due diligence
or consult with a qualified financial
advisor before making investment
decisions. It's time to listen [music]
and learn.
I want to start with how you got into
forensic accounting. I was an accountant
and I was working at Arthur Andersen
doing the normal audit sort of
preparatory work. And I found it
unfulfilling
because the work I would do, I would
find interesting or concerns with the
accounting or otherwise and the clients,
it didn't end up ending anywhere. So,
what ended up happening was the there
was some due diligence work to do where
we could do actually look at
transactions. Companies calling us to
say, you know, we want to spin out this
business or we want to make this
acquisition. And then I asked, put my
hand up, said, "Listen, can I do that
sort of work?" And then I started doing
it and I loved it. I saw some huge
fulfillment. And then it's all about
people you meet. I met a gentleman named
Mel Rosen and he was the head of
accounting at York University and he was
a forensic accountant. He had his own
practice. He taught taught us to pass
the the the UFE at the the exam of the
CPA exam at the time. And um
I said, you know, I'd like to work with
you. And he said, "Well, you get your CA
work done and then we'll think about
it." And that's what I did. And so then
I tutelage under him for some four years
and that that really
made it happen. You weren't on the Enron
file, were you? I was not on the Enron
file. I left Arthur Andersen in 1997.
Couldn't even spell Enron at the time.
And it's it's a very sad thing what
happened. What did happen at Enron? They
essentially had a number of
off-balance-sheet
exposures. So, they would enter into
derivative-type contracts where they
were tied to an energy price, for
example, or even the company's own stock
price. And it'd be like, "This debt only
comes due if the stock price falls to X.
This debt only comes due or this
derivative transaction we'd entered
into." Enron was an energy trader.
Um you know, so if the price of
electricity in kilowatt-hours rises to a
certain amount, well, then there this
debt is no longer due. If it falls to
this level, then there they have to pay
some counterparty. And so, those were
those those risks were essentially
off-balance-sheet.
So, those were not sitting on the
company's liabilities. They were all
contingent. And at the time, the
accounting rules were such that the this
these numbers were not included on the
liabilities. They were just in the
notes.
And so, all of a sudden So, people
weren't paying attention cuz nobody read
that reads the notes. And so, then all
of a sudden things started to happen.
There was a change and movement in
commodity prices. Okay, this is now
we're dealing with the dot-com. There
was a lot of a lot of changes that
happened in the economy. We we had a we
had a a a recession in the early 2000s,
right? And so, that led to a lot of
movements in commodity prices. That
triggered the derivatives.
Surprise, surprise, they can't make the
payments.
It's done. And they weren't required to
reserve or put away in reserves any
amount of Well, if it wasn't on the
balance sheet, then investors and
wouldn't wouldn't have noticed that that
there there was not enough assets per
perhaps to cover. And and why the
implication to Arthur Andersen, which I
think is important and then it's near
and dear to my heart, is you know, the
auditors at Arthur Andersen that were
working on the file, they ended up
signing off on all these things.
Well, when essentially the
proverbial hit the fan, all of a sudden
they were asking questions and the
regulator asked for the working papers
of the auditor, that the papers of which
they would support the audit work. And
they knew perhaps that they didn't do
enough work, so they shredded the
documents. So, all of a sudden they
became guilty
because of their actions. Mhm. And so,
it was found in the courts um upon
appeal
But that was way after the fact because
Arthur Andersen was already was brought
to its knees and it was over. I became a
scapegoat for everything wrong with with
with accounting at the time. And uh
look, change needed to happen. Arthur
Andersen was around the world, all the
partners were folded into the other
firms. What are the limitations on
audits? The limitations? Yeah. The
limitations are you're hired to be a
independent, to give your independent
opinion, and attest that the financial
statements present fairly in all
material respects in accordance with
some set of accounting standards and or
standards as associated with a contract,
for example. And the challenge is time
because you have to do this quickly,
pressures on costs, and essentially
think about it this way, it's like I
tell you, "Look, I just prepared my
report card. I got an A.
I now hand it to you and say, 'Look,
it's an A.' And if you
say that it's an A, I'll pay you X
amount of money."
So, look at your situation. You come
back and say, "Well, it's actually not
an A.
It's kind of a B plus."
Uh how much am I paying you again?
Yeah.
What do you mean it's a B plus? Do you
think that question that way I answered
that question couldn't have been this
way or the other way?
You know, and this is it ties into so
many things, you know, AI and so forth.
Business is judgment. People run
companies, they don't run themselves.
The decisions associated with a business
transaction end up being reflected on
those financial statements. But when the
group that's making the decision in the
business to do something,
well, then they come back to the office
and show up in the in the accounting
department and say, "Hey, we just did
this. You know, can you guys figure out
how to account for it?" And all of a
sudden the accountants are like, "Oh
god, what do I do now? How do I do
this?" Cuz then they And by the way,
when you do this, I want it presented as
as you know, as bright as possible so
that our investors and all our
stakeholders are really excited by the
results. Like, don't present it badly.
You you said a lot of people don't read
the footnotes or the financial
statements. Is that changing in a world
of AI where you can sort of like
download the financial statement, pop it
into AI, and say, "What do I need to
know?" I think it's actually
exacerbating the situation. Oh, spend a
few beats on that. Because
now, read the financial statements,
Anthony. I just put it into AI. I asked
[clears throat] ChatGPT to tell me
what about this? Look for that. Look for
that. And there there's all the
instances of those things. And then I
just read it and it's all there. Well,
did the AI miss it? Did the AI
understand the linkages between each of
those sightings? If I'm If I'm looking
at, for example, I was looking at a
company recently and I was looking at it
was capitalizing costs. Okay, this is a
REIT. And if it capitalizes costs versus
putting them through the income
statement, if it goes through the income
statement, it makes their operating
earnings look poor, lower, and their net
EPS ultimately. But if they put it on
the balance sheet, well, you know,
that's an investment in the future and
everything looks okay. Right? And so,
there's a gray area. Was it an operating
expense or was it a capital item? And
so, I was first thing I looked for was
capitalized interest. And so, it gave me
all the quotes. And then capitalized
costs. It gave me all the quotes. So,
then you think that that's enough. But
you have to then
And I And I was showing one of my guys
this. I said, "So, then let's go to the
income Let's actually pull up the
statements where it told us to go." Cuz
AI made it faster. I now no no longer
needed to flip the 300 pages, but it it
gave me where to go. So, now I went
there and now I could say, "Well, that
means if that is what's happened, then
we need to look at this other note to
see where, you know, the implications of
that. And then we got to look at the
cash flow statement to see how it's
actually impacting what ends up being
reported as as cash flow. And so, those
linkages come it The AI makes me get to
the answer perhaps more quickly, but
it's my If I don't already know where I
want to go, Mhm.
>> then AI just gives me information.
But that information doesn't help my
decision if I didn't start with where I
want to get to. And it sounds like that
information doesn't help your decision
if you don't know the second, third,
fourth order consequence.
>> 100% This is what I love it. If that's
where investors go and that's where
they're going. Everything's going to AI.
The the bottom level of being an
analyst, the junior analyst is is going
to be replaced by an AI. The one that
said find me all the references of, you
know, where the company capitalized
costs.
That the AI can do. I get it.
But you need someone with experience to
know what which of those references
matter and to what that means to the
business.
And this brings about a number of
challenges because well, if that junior
person doesn't learn,
doesn't get on the in on the ground
floor, they'll never learn to be able to
make all those connections. And the only
way to learn is sort of like being in
the weeds and not being in AI.
>> Yes, in fact, it ties to so many things
I I with my own children I've seen
growing up. When we went to school and
then we were in elementary school, we
would be, you know, we'd have to do the
math tables and and recite them. Yeah. 2
* 2 is 4 and so on. I remember I always
struggled with my with my 9 * table and
then my 12 * table and so I had to
memorize them and get them going. But
then my children came along and they
were using a calculator. And apparently
that was okay.
I went bananas.
I said you're not going to use the
calculator. You need to learn it without
the calculator and then you can use the
calculator, which is the same with AI.
You need to understand how the financial
statements are prepared, understand the
linkages, develop mental models. So that
when the AI gives you information,
you can you can digest it and make
decisions. Reminds me of this funny
story when I started university, I ended
up in first year calculus.
And for whatever reason the professor
was supposed to teach that class
couldn't teach it. So the dean of the
math department walked took over.
And on the first class in the first like
minute,
he said there'll be no calculators in
this class. Oh.
Nobody of course listened to him cuz
graphing calculator, you're like, "Oh my
god, this makes my life so much easier."
We show up to the final exam, which is
like, I think 80% of your final mark.
Yeah.
And on the front page it's no
calculators. And he he did not grade
that on a curve.
And it was not pretty for most students.
I taught at university for about 14
years at York and
truly one of a very fulfilling time
in my life and then I still love doing
guest lectures. I remember I I I would
always start to you know, I would go
over the outline and I and I would tell
the students I said, "So assignments are
due at the beginning of class.
>> Mhm. If they're handed in after the 8:30
start time, it's a zero.
It's a zero.
And invariably
at some whether it was the first 10
years the first or second assignment,
somebody would show up and hand it in
late and I would say it's a zero. Yeah.
And they would whine and say it's how
can you do that and you're so draconian
and I said, "Well, you think in the real
world when an RFP is required and you've
signed with the contract with a client
that they demand a report by 9:00 a.m.
on Monday and you show up at 9:05, how's
that look?"
And somehow it's okay.
So it wasn't okay in my class. And and
ultimately I think you you build respect
because people see that there's a rule
and it's followed and then people have
respect for the rule.
There's this sort of like weird
dichotomy I think with students right
now and dichotomy's probably not the
right word. There's this weird
path where students are coming out and
they're more powerful and capable than
ever because they use AI by default. And
so they can get more output than
somebody who's maybe been in their
career 15, 20 years. And I use my
14-year-old as an example. You know, in
a world where he never had to show up to
work, he's a mid-level employee at most
companies based on output. If you never
saw him,
he can give you the the exact same
output that a mid-level employee is
going to give you if everything goes
right.
But the minute something goes wrong,
he doesn't quite understand all the
nuances and all the and AI the I guess
the race for him is like, "Will AI catch
up quicker?" You know, cuz he uses AI by
default.
And I sort of think about this as like
making a recipe, right? Like if I pull
out a cookbook and I make a recipe and I
do everything perfectly, you wouldn't be
able to tell the difference between me
and the chef. Like the food maybe it's
not plated as well, but it's going to
taste great. It's going to taste the
same. You'd be like, "This is amazing."
But if something goes wrong, if the
oven's too hot, if I don't stir enough,
I don't put enough salt in, I don't know
why it didn't go right. But the minute a
chef, the chef who created that recipe,
who's got all the experience, who did
the you know, who's made it hundreds of
times, they taste it and they're like,
"Oh, your oven said 375, but it's
actually 350. You stirred this too much.
You let this boil. You" They instantly
know what went wrong.
>> Yes.
>> And I wonder if in a world of AI, that's
the nuance. And I was talking to Steve
Schwarzman about this in a different
context,
but he basically said, you know, a lot
of the analysts coming up,
they know the numbers, but they don't
know what the numbers mean. Correct.
Experience teaches you judgment and and
you talk about this in your book. It's
all about the mental models. I I I
believe that strongly. The experience
teaches you what the numbers mean as
we've spoken about and when you have
experience, you say, "I've seen that
before."
And a lot of the things I see happening
today link back to things I've seen when
I started my career over the last 30
years. And I think that's something that
the AI can't quite do unless you tell it
where to look because it doesn't know
the link tool that I'm thinking about.
>> Right. But if I if I can make the
initial stage, it can help me
get there quicker
and more accurately.
But if I don't if I don't already have a
model of what I'm looking for, it's not
going to get there. What are you seeing
today? We're talking now equity markets,
is that Yeah. I think we're in
uh what seems to be, you know, and I I
hate calling things bubbles, but I think
we're in a period of extreme
uh euphoria where
the numbers, the fundamentals and
fundamentals is thrown around in the
investment industry like the the word
love is thrown around among humans. You
know, the fundamentals well, someone
looks at the chart and sees that, you
know, it did a double bottom. Well,
that's the fundamentals. And someone
else says, you know, that they're
looking at the RSI or some other things
or someone else says they're just
looking at cash flow or someone's
looking at the multiple related to
earnings and those are the fundamentals.
Well, at the you know, historically and
if we follow what what Buffett says, the
company is the present value of its
future cash flows. And the how do you
develop those cash flows? Well, you need
to do forecast on what it's what it what
it's going to drive the business. And so
that's what I think the fundamentals
are. And so when a company today is not
generating much in free cash, in fact
negative, and yet the market wants to
trade it at a multiple of its revenues,
well, then the company's valuations is
extracted from its current fundamentals
and trading based on some future
expectations. I've been asked, you know,
if you could have anything, what would
it be? And I'd say tomorrow's newspaper
because then I'd know what was going to
happen and I would be able to invest on
that. And so we're all trying to do the
mostly impossible, figure out what's
going to happen tomorrow.
And all I know is I've seen that when
you read and speak to investors and they
say that the numbers don't matter and
financial statements no longer matter
because this is changing the world, I
say, "Well, I've seen this before. You
know, I saw that Nortel was changing the
world and Lucent and Cisco and 360
Networks. They were building out the
infrastructure of the internet that
we're using today.
But those companies don't exist anymore.
They built what they built and that
still exists, but they no longer exist.
Either bankrupt or folded into other
companies. Cisco still exists today, but
has never traded at at its historical
valuation and yet it's a it's it's a
multiple bigger than it was back then
and by earnings and by revenue.
If you're a founder and you know naming
your startup takes forever. You finally
land on the perfect name only to find
out that Peter from Delaware got to the
.com first. So you're stuck with two bad
options. Pay [music] up and fund Peter's
retirement or tack on random words until
your domain looks like a Wi-Fi password.
But after all the time and money spent
on naming, you don't want that and
thanks [music] to .tech domains, you
don't have to. With .tech, you get the
name you actually want. It's clean,
sharp, no compromises. It instantly
[music] tells investors and customers
that you're building technology.
CES.tech, the [music] world's biggest
consumer tech event uses .tech domains.
So does 1x.tech, [music] an OpenAI
backed startup along with hundreds of
thousands of tech companies worldwide.
So don't waste another minute
negotiating. Go to GoDaddy, Namecheap,
Cloudflare, or wherever you buy your
domains and get your .tech domain today.
Are you struggling to manage your
projects at work using lots of different
tools for communication, task
management, and scheduling? Doesn't have
to be this hard. Basecamp [music] is the
refreshingly straightforward, reliable
project management platform. It's
designed [music] for small and growing
businesses. So, there's none of the
complexity you get with software
designed for enterprises. Complexity
kills momentum. Basecamp clears the path
so your team [music] can actually move.
Do away with scattered emails, endless
meetings, and missed deadlines. [music]
With Basecamp, everything lives in one
place: to-do lists, message boards, chat
conversations, scheduling, and
documents. When information [music] is
scattered, attention is, too. Basecamp
brings both back together.
Basecamp's intuitive design ensures that
everyone knows what's happening, who's
responsible, and what's coming next. My
head of operations swears by this
platform [music] and is the first person
to suggest it to anyone. If you need
another decorated referral, you should
call her.
Whether you're a small team or growing
business, Basecamp [music] scales with
you. Stop struggling, start making
progress, get somewhere with Basecamp.
Sign up for free at basecamp.com.
I guess what you're saying is the same
as we know this is the future, but it's
also the same in that we don't know who
the winners are going to be. That's
right. And and I think right now, the
reason why I think we're in a in a very
high-risk situation is because the cost
of the risk is priced very low.
And that's when the risk is highest. And
so, how do we look at that? We look at
the
the high-yield bond spread, the spread
between the 10-year bond and the
high-yield bond in the US. Okay, that's
the non-investment grade bonds. Well,
that's the tightest, near the tightest
that's ever been.
Mhm. Which means that
investors are willing to lend money to
non-investment grade companies at a
spread over what a government bond is at
a rate which is the tightest it's been
practically in history. So, there's no
risk priced into the bond market. And
then in the equity markets, we use VIX,
which is a measurable volatility of the
of the S&P 500, and that is trading at a
benign level. It's not the lowest it's
ever been, but it's at a benign level.
So, in essence, what investors are
saying is there's no risk. Everything's
fine. Isn't that the age-old wisdom of
like don't fight the Fed, though? For
sure. The future is is pretty clear, at
least in the short term, but the
implications of that are we I I don't
proclaim to know, but interest rates are
coming down. I mean, all the governments
want interest rates down. Right, they
They want interest rates down because
because debts have have continued to
balloon in a period which has been
relatively buoyant
uh by historical standards. And interest
rates they perceive interest rates are
going to go down, that's going to keep
on the buoyancy. Well,
the central bank, and if you followed
Powell despite all the pressures coming
from Trump to cut rates,
I mean, Powell is going to cut rates
because
he's concerned about either the
employment situation, right? Or the
economic situation
more broadly. Or political pressure.
There's supposed to be a separation. It
seemed You're right, but it seems like
he's actually noticing that because the
Now, all of a sudden, we've seen some
some more strain in the in the
employment market, and that I think is
what's leading him to believe, "Okay,
now it's time probably to start cutting
rates." What happens when we cut rates
and markets are at all-time highs? It
could become a situation of where you
sell the news because everybody was
moving the market up in anticipation of
it happening because the belief is as we
when we cut rates, we provide more
lower-cost capital to companies, they
put that capital to work, and it
generates return. Every company is only
as good
or as stable or as strong as its
customer base.
And if we're seeing that the customer
base of
uh you know, let's call it the average
Joe, and I call that Joe Sixpack.
Uh he's a buddy of mine. We all have a
buddy Joe Sixpack. And so, if Joe
Sixpack is struggling,
then
ultimately, how is everything going to
trickle down and create growth?
>> You know, I have a hard time reconciling
this, right? Because the the the
territory, the boots on the ground, is a
lot of people are struggling. Seems like
more people than
at least in my adult lifetime, uh with
the exception of maybe the 2008
financial crisis. And we have markets at
all-time highs. Yep. And we have
inflation, core inflation, actually
going up. And we also have governments
uh with high unemployment pushing
interest rates down. And we have this
this really I don't make macro
predictions, but we have this really
interesting setup. And then on top of
that, like just from my like how I sort
of approach things, you have the
greatest investor of all time
who has built up uh I don't know
>> cash What's he at? 400 billion by now? I
don't know. Or 350 billion. His largest
cash holding as a percentage of market
cap, I think, ever. I struggle to
reconcile all of these things into some
coherent view of like The the thing
about the markets
and companies is they'll continue longer
than you and I will be alive. And so,
when
you're investing, it just depends on
your horizon.
And I think what's happening today is
investors have learned,
and rightly so, that every time the
market falls, it rallies back. Mhm. And
I like the comment you made, Shane. I'm
not here to predict markets. Uh it's a
fool's game.
Uh I don't know, you know, I I wish I
knew, then I'd just buy futures and make
tons of money or short them. But what
instead I know is I'm looking at the
underlying companies, and except for
some of the Mag 7 that are growing their
earnings, the smaller and mid-caps are
not. When Walmart is telling you that
there's a problem with its sales
forecast, and Target is struggling, and
Lululemon can't sell the same number of
pants, and Starbucks is considering to
changing some of its pricing and some of
its its business model, you know, this
is Joe Sixpack and and Stevie Winebox
that stepped up from Joe Sixpack. You
have Stevie Winebox in the middle. Um
and I think they're the ones that are
struggling. And so, it tells me that
this can continue, and and markets can
continue going up for for
any number of amount of time because
it's a function of how much liquidity is
in the market as well. People have If
investors have lots of cash, they'll
continue to invest. The people that
you're seeing that are making the most
money today
um are not those that historically
necess- in general, I'm speaking, the
ones that you hear about that have made
money historically. We talk Ray Dalio,
we talk about you mentioned, of course,
Warren Buffett. And there was a there's
a quote that was that I that I learned
over time, and it says, "During raging
bull markets, knowledge is superfluous,
and experience is a handicap."
Because
if you have the the benefit of knowing
what happened in all the other blow-ups,
you know how painful it could be. But if
you've never experienced it, and every
time something went wrong, it just
rallied back like nothing happened,
well,
you think it's going to continue. I
guess the argument against that is this
time it's different, which is what we
always
>> Which is the most dangerous words in in
life and in finance. One day I want to
write a book that's that that marries
finance with
life because it's it's it's it's one in
the same. I remember this interview
Alice Schroeder did. She hasn't done
many interviews, and one of the most
illuminating things that I remember from
that interview is that Buffett, when he
was looking at patterns, he wasn't
trying to identify what's different this
time. He's trying to focus on what's the
same. Yes. Talk to me about that. And
so,
what I see as the same, we actually put
you know, our I I transitioned the the
forensic accounting knowledge and and
skill set into what is today Veritas.
And so, that's an independent equity
research firm, and then later into a
also an asset management arm. And all of
that started because we wrote a sell
report on Nortel in in 2000.
And people thought we were crazy. And
you know, at the time I was 29 years
old, so I didn't realize what I was
actually doing. It's amazing when we're
young. But you didn't realize the impact
>> of what you were doing. I didn't Like
what You knew the accounting. I knew
what I was looking at, but didn't
realize that if you dropped said pebble
into the water, what happens. And then
when John Roth gets quoted in the
newspaper that we're hurting his ability
to raise capital, and clients are
canceling, and you know, employees are
contacting us upset because of the
things we're saying, and it's like, "I
didn't mean to hurt anybody. I'm just
saying the truth." Hence the name
Veritas.
So, let's link to what I think some of
the the the linkages from the past. So,
at the time,
you had Nortel,
and you had Cisco, and you had Lucent,
and they were building out various
components, parts of the internet.
And what they would do was they needed
customers. Well, the customers needed to
raise money cuz if you're going to build
infrastructure, you're not going to
generate cash flow for some time. So,
they would raise money from equity
holders, and eventually get some debt.
But the powers that be at Lucent and
Nortel would also offer them, so they
would say, "Buy this $10 million worth
of product, and why don't you pay me
over some extended period of time?
Oh, and by the way, we'll give you a
line of credit so that
you need 10 million from us of of cable
uh but well you can also you need to buy
some routers from Cisco. You know what?
We'll give you some line of credit so
you could do that. Because Nortel could
borrow money, could could had a great
balance, you could raise money,
whatever. And so that's what was
happening. Well, ultimately when the
equity market started to wobble and
there was no one left to continue to
make sales to, right? Well, then now all
of a sudden North and Nortel didn't get
paid on its debts
and the wheels came off.
And then the 360 Networks and JDS
Uniphase and etc. that were the
customers of the big three that I just
mentioned they went by the wayside.
And so what ended up sort of now let's
take that and think about what's
happening today.
So you have the likes of the Nvidias of
the world and let's say Microsoft and
you have Open AI and such and
Nvidia is investing in Open AI. Mhm. And
Microsoft is an investor in Open AI.
Microsoft offers cloud services to Open
AI. So it's a customer. So Open AI
becomes a customer of Microsoft but
Microsoft gave it the money so they
could actually pay it back.
Nvidia invests in Open AI and Nvidia is
a
a supplier of chips to Open AI. So it's
all circular what's going on here.
There's a new a company that just went
public earlier this year CoreWeave. Who
is its largest customer? CoreWeave
provides data transaction like analysis
of on chips, right? It's a data farm for
the large AI users like Microsoft. Its
largest customer is Microsoft. Microsoft
hasn't invested in it.
But Nvidia supplies
pretty much all its chips. Well, Nvidia
is a large or is a meaningful investor
in
CoreWeave. CoreWeave goes public.
It's trying to close its its equity it's
financing on the last moment Nvidia buys
$250 million worth of shares of
CoreWeave so that it could close the
deal. These are you know JP Morgan gives
them a loan so that they could just
before they go public and then they go
public and repay the loan to JP Morgan.
Who's the one of the lead underwriters?
JP Morgan. No one's doing anything bad.
No one's cheating. It's just these are
all the same type of symptoms of things
that were going on way back some 25
years ago. All these things don't mean
anything. Nothing means anything until
it means something. I say you know the
things that we're talking about right
now these little things if you will. You
know in the time of 2000s just like we
talked about Enron that didn't have the
disclosure.
So the key wrinkle to everything I
brought up and that's why now I want to
take it to the accounting is the
financial statements of Nortel Mhm.
didn't show that long-term loan
as a part of current assets. It showed
it as part of long-term assets. So when
the simple calculation of current ratios
they would only take well current assets
and so this long-term asset that
wouldn't show up as part of the
liquidity calculation. It also wouldn't
show up as part of operating cash flow.
And if it's not part of operating cash
flow then operating cash flow looks
better. And no one would look at
long-term receivables. Mhm. And what
they would because they're taught in
their CFA how do you calculate free cash
flow? Operating cash flow less CapEx.
But this is the problem with when you
just create the ratio and invest by
ratio.
The ratio needs to be adapted to the
company
the life cycle, the industry, the
business model. If the company's selling
things at a long-term receivable for
over a period of extending beyond one
operating cycle but it's part of its
normal operations that should be part of
operating cash flow. And in fact after
after Nortel FASB changed the rules and
then long-term receivables became part
of operating and short and and and
current assets. And that's something we
wrote about. We said this is wrong. You
need to the free cash flow is actually
negative. Because this number needs to
be shown. So they're extremely
vulnerable to something going wrong. If
the customer can't make payments. And
today now let's look at the accounting
today Nvidia would make that investment
in in CoreWeave? It's such a small
meaningless dollar amount
to the balance sheet of Nvidia Mhm. that
the number amount of disclosure is
irrelevant. It be it's a it's a related
party. Now we only own 5% so that's not
material to to Nvidia and the dollar
amount to Nvidia's total balance sheet
is also immaterial. So
it doesn't matter.
But
if this is happening over hundreds of
transactions
where it's making investments like this
in its own customers then what ends up
happening if
all of a sudden it runs out of the
ability to get cash or the customers end
up having problems selling services with
the chips that it buys then kind of
things start to fall
fall apart. Introducing the remarkable
Paper Pro move. It's a paper tablet, a
digital notebook that combines the
familiar feel of paper with the digital
powers of a tablet. Start by taking
notes with any of the dozens of built-in
templates, then turn your handwriting
into typed text and share it by email or
Slack. You can even continue your work
on the desktop or mobile apps. Too much
technology draws us in and shuts out the
world. This paper tablet [music]
doesn't. It will never beep or buzz or
try to grab your attention so you can
devote your focus to what or who is
right in front of you. You can fit all
your notes and documents and last up to
2 weeks on a single charge but slips
easily inside your jacket pocket. And
most importantly, remarkable's mission
is about helping you think better. That
means no apps, social media or any other
distractions. You can try remarkable
Paper Pro move for 100 days for free. If
it's not what you were looking for you
get your money back. Visit
remarkable.com to learn more and get
your paper tablet today. Don't we always
invest in our customers' businesses
though? You give them payment terms, you
allow them to extend, you you know
that's an investment in your customers.
Again, it is it is fantastic business
savvy.
You want if I'm trying to create a new
paradigm which is AI
then I in order to foster
that paradigm
I need to invest in it as a as the key
player in it. And what ends up
happening? If you see that my name as a
key investor and and a leader in this
industry is making an investment in this
company well then what does everybody
else do? Warren Buffett tells you he's
buying something what does everybody do?
They go buy it. Well, if Nvidia is
buying something what do all the private
equity firms do looking around? Oh we
that's a good one. There's another one
it's not CoreWeave TensorWeave like the
AMD equivalent which is private now. So
I'd imagine they would all exactly pile
into that. You got it.
>> Yeah. This Nortel report I want to come
back to this first I see you dropped
this report and you happen to be
correct.
What responsibility
you know remember the Superman quote
with great power comes great
responsibility. I I I said Spider-Man.
Spider-Man Spider-Man yeah.
>> I love that quote.
>> And I wonder about these things like
when you're right it's great. But what
about when you're wrong?
>> And that's one of the things
you know we're celebrating our 25th
anniversary this year and
I developed 10 rules investing rules and
they they relate to life as well.
But one of them is being negative
sounds intelligent. Mhm.
Being negative typically is looking at
facts. It's looking at numbers.
It's presenting them to you in a way
that says wow that seems really
compelling. If I want to sell you
something that is you know that so
that's the negative side. If I want to
sell you the positive side well then I
got to sell you the dream.
AI is going to change the world. People
are going to be no are no longer going
to need to work. We're going it's going
to replace jobs. Margins are going to go
higher. There's going to create you know
it's it's going to improve health care
services. All the now all the phenomenal
things that could potentially happen.
And so you'd see that and then you're
willing to invest. It's you're buying a
dream. But if I tell you yeah but a lot
of this is based on all these intricate
transactions where there's no disclosure
about you go ah that doesn't matter
Anthony. Look we're changing the world
buddy. I like to say none of these
things matter until they matter. And
then when they matter they matter a lot.
You know with great power comes great
responsibility you're right. This should
not be interpreted as I'm telling that
something's going to blow up. I'm just
saying that there are some linkages
things we've seen in past euphoric
times.
Things could continue for
any number of period. I don't I don't
know. But we're getting to a point as I
said earlier where there's very little
cost to risk today. What are the 10
investing rules? Oh
now you're going to put me on the spot.
I I I don't I I don't remember all of
them. Uh Why don't you give me some of
them? The number one rule and I borrowed
this from from Warren. And so if you
ever he's not going to pay attention to
listen to me but I did reach out to him.
His number one rule is don't lose money.
And my concern with don't lose money is
any investment requires the absorption
of risk.
And so, if you're not willing to take
some level of risk, which means
potentially to lose money, you won't
make money, either. So, you don't want
to invest with a from a from position of
fear. Mhm.
>> You want to invest, I think, so my
number one rule is avoid embarrassing
loss. You want to avoid the loss of a
company potentially blowing up. If the
company might, you know, if it looks
like it's a little bit expensive and it
might and it might go potentially go
down 5% or something or 10% or 20, okay,
you can deal with that. But if you're
investing in a company where if
something goes wrong, you could wake up
one day and it's down 20% or 50%? That's
the one you don't want to have in your
portfolio, cuz investors will never
invest with you again.
And you'll also be scarred. Because
people make investments. This is why
it's so difficult to be to be a
long-term sound investor. Because
emotions get in the way.
Which is one of my rules. Emotion has no
place in investing.
Another rule is
don't trust management.
I'm sure there's many management teams
that I run my, you know, we're a
operating business,
private company, and it's not that they
you know, you you shouldn't trust
anything they say, but again, it's it's
a mindset. Uh everything you do is is
about how you you you present your your
mindset going in. And so, if you go in
with the mindset of don't trust, then
you'll be curious. Then you're going to
ask questions. It's not that you you
think that they're bad people. I didn't
say they're bad people. I said just
don't trust. Verify and then trust. And
then another rule would be that you have
to read the notes to the financial
statements first before you actually
read the statements. The notes to the
financial statements tell you how the
company modified the accounting cuz it
it made accounting choices. We decided
to account for this these type of
transactions in this way. So, then when
you look at the financial statements,
once you know how they're prepared, you
can better interpret them. Accounting is
a language. If I said to you tomorrow
you're going to speak Spanish. Oh, you
know, you could do AI and you figure it
out and you're going to learn it. But
the nuances of the language, an
individual who did a PhD
in that language, they're going to
understand way more about the language
than you are. The same like reading the
financial statements. The more you
understand of what went into them and
how they're prepared, the better you're
going to interpret them. What are the
red flags you look for? I like the way
you you posed the question because it
sets up what I we've learned over time.
The problem with the red flags is it
gets to your point that you started at
before where you don't want to be crying
wolf. And so, I've learned to temper.
Because you could be wrong. Mhm. It's
not red flags, we call them flammable
items. Okay. So, this goes to the pro
our process. It's a three-stage process
that we use and we teach cuz one of our
we have Veritas U. And so, we teach
investors how to make better investment
decisions. And so, the the first stage
is you understand the business and the
control environment.
Okay? Again, understand and understand
the accounting that's being used so that
when you study the financial statements
everything else, they all make sense.
And you understand sort of the the the
structure, how is management
compensated? What stage of their life
cycle are they at? Because those are all
sort of constraints and opportunities
within the business. So, then you look
for a flammable item. For example,
company's generating negative cash flow.
That could be by itself a red flag in
the normal way. This this type of I
would call forensic analysis is taught.
Unless you know, so if a company's
generating negative cash, it may
actually be a fantastic thing. They're
investing in an AI startup that is going
to be a huge opportunity and they've
shown over time that the return on
invested capital is in excess of 20% or
50% or whatever it is. And so, they're
investing in something. Yes, it's
negative cash flow today, but I'm not
investing for the cash flow today, I'm
investing for the cash flow tomorrow.
So, you see that as the red flag, you
don't invest in it. And unless you
understood the first part, which was the
fact that where they are in their life
cycle type of business, etc., that is
now not a red flag, it's just a
flammable item.
By itself, not a problem. It depends.
And then you get to the third bucket,
which is
the spark.
And so, you're always looking for a
spark. Because
let's use that same negative cash flow.
Well, if all of a sudden
a new competitor comes into that
company's operating space, okay?
And is able to take market share, Mhm.
now all of a sudden that negative cash
flow is a problem. If you notice in the
financial statements when you look at
that negative cash flow, the company's
taking on very expensive debt.
Again, very expensive debt by itself
doesn't mean anything because if the
potential return on invested capital is
higher than that cost of capital, it's
all good.
But if a new peer comes in play, now all
of a sudden that model may not work. And
now you have a blowup. In my podcast,
The Fact Finders, I I interviewed
an individual who we've used before as
private investigator and he's the one
that got me onto this this way of this
mental model. And he says, you know, if
the CEO
beats his wife and runs stop signs,
kicks his dog, doesn't get along with
the neighbors, probably could be a
problem.
But that's not going to show up in the
financial statements. That's not going
to show up in any interviews. You got to
kind of follow things that are going on.
What does that organization stand for?
How are they operating? What are their
values? But not just what they write
down. The culture and the values are not
what you read on the financial
statements and in their in their press
releases. We wrote about Valeant. We
said sell Valeant. Okay, we're the only
sell on on Valeant in 20 12, 2013. The
company didn't blow up until 2015. Okay?
But
they and they would talk about their
integrity and their, you know, how they
were changing the world with the with
the drug reformulations they were doing
and so forth.
But if you look deeper, they were just
manipulating the accounting and changing
the pricing on on drugs and creating a
fraudulent network of online pharmacies.
Valeant's Valeant's a good one because
there's a lot of
well-known investors in that. Yep. How
did so many well-known, well-respected
investors go wrong? People who are known
for their due diligence, people who are
known for their legwork.
>> I know. I sat with them. Talked to them
before the before. It's a situation
where someone is such a masterful
spinner of a story and is Are you saying
the CEO as a CEO?
>> The CEO and the management team. So, you
had Mike Pearson. Yeah.
>> And it was executing. And you know, he
comes where he came from a great
pre-pedigree. He was not taking a salary
and everything was tied to the stock
price. You know, he he was, you know,
tirelessly working in the company. And
he'd proven cuz what ends up happening
is price creates narrative. Mhm. So, all
of a sudden you don't believe it day
one.
But then you see that they made an
acquisition. It didn't seem like it was
going to work, but then it works and the
stock price goes higher.
And then they do something else and it
kind of seems a little bit strange. And
then they change their accounting and
they and they change the way they wreck
they they present their up their
non-GAAP metrics, which is things we
noticed like that's another huge
flammable item. The company says, you
know, they're reporting their they use
an adjusted EBITDA and they calculate it
in a certain way. And then the following
year, they calculated a different way.
Well, that's a non-audited number. It's
an
it's it's whatever management wants and
you know, the markets just believe it.
And so,
that's something that Valeant was
notorious about. But didn't matter
because the stock price just kept going
higher. And as the stock price keeps
going higher, it's very difficult, okay?
In in the money management industry,
when you're underperforming, it is so
difficult to stay the course. Mhm. You
saw this, you know, in the financial
crisis, that movie about,
you know, The Big Short. Like those
individuals became clients of ours. Like
I know Porter Collins, if he ever
listens here. And and Danny and so
forth. Like we we befriended each other
during during this time of madness and
afterwards. It was like they were crazy.
Like you end up looking at yourself
going, "I'm crazy. I'm seeing this and
nobody cares." It becomes so difficult
when you're on the other side. Now
you're trying to make money and raise
money from clients because investors now
are saying, "Well, wait a minute, you're
up five or you're down five, market's up
20, you don't know what you're doing.
What are you doing?" And you know, it's
hard because that's how you earn your
living. That I think becomes the becomes
the problem. And with Valeant, it just
went on for so long.
And you need to look at the market
conditions at the time. Because the
people are running a business, but the
business is operating in a certain
economic environment. Well, you had
brand new bond market activity, QE. No
one ever heard of QE before the early
2000 or 2010s. The bank The the central
banks were buying long-dated bonds to
keep interest rates low. Well, now all
of a sudden, what does that do to a
company like Valeant that's making
that's growing through acquisition and
needs capital? Well, they could borrow
money at very low rates.
And if that's the case, then their IRR,
cost of capital, etc., the hurdle rate
is very low. So, they look really great.
All these transactions that may not have
made made any sense in other time
periods when risk-free rates were not,
you know, in the one or two percent
range,
all of a sudden they make sense. If I
had to go back in time, we should have
said, "Buy Valeant."
at the beginning
because
we had studied Biovail. So, Bio Valeant
bought Biovail. Biovail was a Canadian
company that was run by Eugene Melnyk,
and we wrote a sell report on on that
company in in the early 2000s. And and
the company ended up being a figment of
its former self.
Uh but it had something. It had some
formulations for of drugs which were
long-dated in their uh release. So, they
they would buy a drug and then repurpose
the the the formulation so they'll be
slow release, etc. And then they And
they also had a phenomenal tax structure
where they were set up in Barbados. And
Barbados is like heaven.
So, the more money you make as income,
you pay a lower percentage tax. Imagine
that.
So, what Valeant did was they bought
that structure when they bought the
Biovail. Oh, interesting.
>> And so, that allowed them to extract all
the cost of tax.
So many interesting things they did.
They set up their head office in Quebec
province in Canada, French-speaking.
Well, the Caisse, which is the largest
one of the largest pension plans in
Canada, right? Their mandate is not just
to make money for its pensioners, okay?
And they're And this is the civil
pension fund, one of the And I think
second largest in Canada behind CPP.
And one of their mandates is to invest
in Quebec-based companies and foster
growth. It's a phenom I used to think it
was a problem, but actually I've changed
my way. I think CPP should do the same.
CPP should be encouraged to invest in
Canada. The US pension plan should buy
US companies, encouraged to do that.
Anyway, so in this case, you set up in
Quebec, you know you got a set flow of
capital that's going to come from this
Quebec-based pension plan.
And I remember meeting with the
with the leaders at the Caisse at the
time talking about this and they're
like, "We don't want to own it. We're We
We agree with you, Anthony. We're
worried about all this stuff." But these
are the subtleties that you need like
every Again, when you see it's a
flammable, you didn't even know that was
a flammable item unless you know from
the first page, "Oh, they're set up in
Quebec." And you go, "Well, why did that
happen?"
Which is part of the mental model of
being curious to say
"Nothing happens without a reason." If
you notice something and you go, "Well,
that seems really weird. No one else
does that." And most people just say,
"Well, it's okay. Doesn't matter."
Well, actually, that's what matters. Is
complicated just in general like a red
flag for you? I remember Buffett and
Munger getting tailed with something
with the SEC in the early 70s, I think
it was. Their structure was just It was
uh legal. It was rational. It was not
transparent, if I recall correctly. It
was incredibly complicated.
And they ended up simplifying it, but
they weren't doing anything wrong. So
again, I've, you know, sat with
management teams
and you go through their 10-K
and then you see a list of all their
operating subsidiaries.
And you see the different places that
they're operating. Again, thing about
investing today is there's so much
pressure on the analyst to cover more
stocks. Mhm. The money management fees
today are a fraction of what they were
even a decade ago. Right. So, the
companies that are doing the investing,
the fixed cost of doing investing like
paying the audit,
doing the back office, all that stuff.
Yes, it's come down a bit, but it's
still there. Yeah. All that's been
squeezed is
the the the cost of the money
management. So, they're having to look
for shortcuts. And that means, "Just
give me the number, Anthony. Just give
me that one number. I just want that one
number." And then you get the one number
that management gives them, and then
they just accept that and move on. I was
talking and I'm not going to mention who
I was talking to, a well-known CFO once
about earnings management. Yes. And they
said, you know, we would call analysts
after the earnings call.
And we would, you know, legally, but we
would definitely lead them uh to what
numbers to expect for the next quarter
even if we weren't and we would
sometimes manipulate that if we wanted
to. And I always thought that that was a
bit nefarious, but I mean, this is how
people work and how the world works. And
So, just being com You know, to you, I
think you asked the question, "Is being
complicated a a problem?" Well, it's
just "Why is it happening?" And then you
go back to "Nothing happens without a
reason." Then you point to some company
operating in the British Virgin Islands
that's listed on the list and go, "What
does this company do?" Yeah. And
management starts sweating.
And so, "Why are you asking that?" "I
don't know." You have your answer before
you ask a question.
Do you get to a point where things are
like too complicated people don't even
know what's going on? Like it always
starts with like this one thing makes
sense and then but over, you know, 30,
40 years you end up with a structure
that nobody even internally probably
understands.
>> You know, they they interviewed um Fast
Andrew Fastow, who was the CFO of of
Enron, and he's done many an interview
on this. Also, I I have because when we
do our training, we have a few of these
interviews that we that we quote. And
it's Companies don't start out as being
crooked. They have to convince someone
to buy a product, okay, or a service.
So, money comes in to the company in
some fashion or time and then gets
converted into something that adds
value.
The problem becomes outside stakeholders
come in and say, "Well, I need you to
make X
because you want my money. Well, I'll
give you my money so long as you give me
this return."
Well, that works until there's a
problem.
And now there's no CEO that wants to
disappoint.
So, it's very simple. The CFO comes to
talk to me, I'm the CEO, and he says,
"Look, I know uh Anthony, we were going
to make a dollar, but we're coming in at
95 cents."
And I say to him, "You get back to your
room and find me 5 cents." Yeah.
"You like your job?
You like your kids going to private
school? You like your stock options, how
much they're worth? You see all these
employees we have? They We give them
stock as a part of their compensation
every quarter.
Like that's a problem. We can't
disappoint." And then it starts. And it
starts slowly.
>> It always starts slowly. And look,
they're It's what Andy said in in that I
think correct those interviews. It's
like, you know, it started with a little
bit and I figured next quarter I could
bring it back and
>> Yes. And it's just, you know, that's the
thing. Life is a dangerous thing this
way whether we've pushed something even
in life, right? You know, well, look, if
I smoke a bit or drink a bit or tell
this little lie, you know, no one
notices and I'm I'm okay. Well, then
maybe I do a little bit more of each one
of those things and no one notices. And
then it's all good, right?
But then
Question here is a little bit. Do
companies that report free cash flow on
their press releases or in their
financial statements tend to outperform?
I don't have that data. What would be
your guess? It's not a common metric to
report. My guess is I would say not
necessarily. No, I would say no. What do
you think of EBITDA? Uh EBITDA is the
mother of all disastrous
measures. Why? Because of what investors
want to believe that it is.
And that it's something that is cash
flow.
That it's something that can be compared
to debt total debt.
And it is not. It is purely a operating
performance metric
calculated before interest, tax,
depreciation, and amortization. That's
it.
Now,
what runs into a problem is, "Well, what
do I do with stock options? What do I do
with joint venture gains? What do I do
with gains on investments that I made
that I happened to sell this year? What
do I do with the charges that I took on
that acquisition that I bought this year
that I included in my EBITDA, the
profits, but at the cost that associated
with that opera that transaction, should
I include that in EBITDA?" Aren't those
one-time costs? If making acquisitions
is part of my business model, Oh, I hear
you. they're no longer one-time costs.
This gets us back to We have a course
called The Secrets of Free Cash Flow.
And that's been our most watched uh and
taught course. And that's because it
started We said it earlier. We said free
cash flow is operating cash flow less
CapEx.
But it's not.
It depends. Every Every answer that
someone asks you, "What is What should
it be?" Well, it depends. Depends on the
company. You got it. "How should I
calculate it?" Well, it depends. What
decision do you need to make? You always
start with
the facts before you think about a
transaction and how you're going to
account for it. It's all about the
facts, the constraints, and the
objectives.
Right? The facts determine what did I
sell, what did I buy, from who, at what
cost, under what terms, etc. So, those
are the facts, broadly. Then I have the
constraints. Well, I'm a private
company. Who uses the statements? Well,
just me and my partners. Who cares?
Where I put it, it's less less
important. But if there's an outside
onlooker on this, well, now it matters
because they're looking at it. I now
have outside investors. I have debt. I
have a debt covenant. All of those
things I'm public. Now I have the SEC.
Those are all constraints. I operate in
the US. I got FASB. PCAOB. I operate in
Canada. I have IFRS. I have CPAB. And
the last is the objectives.
I want to sell my business this year.
And my business sells on EBITDA.
Buddy, I'll tell you how I'm going to
account for it.
My business investors want free cash
flow. I'll tell you how we're going to
account for it.
It's those three points.
When I teach accounting, I teach those
three things.
That's fascinating.
I want to talk stock options for a
little bit. You brought that up. I want
to come back to this. Like, how should
investors think about stock options
today? And then, how would you change
accounting rules to better account for
stock options? Two separate questions,
but Seem you're good. I hate them.
Personally, in public companies,
however, I I understand why companies
want to use them. I mean, my take is
they're You know, if you look at most
buybacks, they're just covering up stock
options.
>> Correct. Very good. So, that's an
expense. I think that stock options,
what they do,
everybody it comes down to human
motivation. So,
if I am going to compensate you on the
stock price,
then you're going to make decisions that
move the stock price. In my early
classes when I teach,
I I always say that economy and
economics reality is way over here, as
far as I can see with my hand.
And the accounting is way over there, as
far as I can go
with my hand.
Because
if, for example,
you know, I'm going to take a very
simple manufacturing company cuz
everybody understands that. We make
pens. We drive pens. We're making a
thousand pens an hour.
And
I sell the pen. You sell, you know,
today we made, you know, over eight
hours we made 8,000 pens. One of my
sales people sells a thousand pens.
Well, how do I calculate the cost of
that thousand pens? Do I just take the
8,000 pens that I do, divide take 1,000
over 8,000, that's the total cost, and
then that's what I allocate, right? The
reality is I sold them a thousand pens,
and it was the last thousand.
Do I stop the press, figure out the cost
of that last thousand? Do I average it?
Do I even though I sold them the last
ones, do I calculate the cost of the
first thousand, which may be a little
bit higher because there were some setup
costs to change my machine to make the
thousand? Mhm. All of those three
options, I gave you a business reality
for what the accounting is, FIFO, LIFO,
or average cost. So, the reality is I
sold them the last thousand. The
accountant said, "Well, we want to show
high margin.
So, we're going to use average."
And that's all good. That ties that
point, but I want to get to your
question because I I don't think I I I
got on a side track, and I want to
answer your question about stock
options.
So,
I think stock options should be an
expense.
And if they're not an expense, I I
borrow from Buffett and even the chair
of the accounting has said things like
this that that if it's not an expense,
then what is it? You can choose to pay
someone in stock options, or you can
choose to pay them in cash. So, if I pay
all my employees, you pay you have the
same company, you're a we're a
competitor, you pay all your employees
with stock options, I pay them in cash.
I have a lower EBITDA. I have a lower
EPS. Your stock trades higher than mine.
Stock price goes down. All of a sudden,
all your employees leave.
And they want to come work for me.
And all my guys are pretty happy.
They don't care. So, you should include
it as an expense.
Taking this one step further to and why
I brought up reality and accounting is
that as an employee at any level, even
the CEO and CFO, sure, the things they
say, the things they do will affect
market's perception of the company,
perhaps in the near term, perhaps in the
medium term.
But in the in the longer term, in the in
the fullness of time, the results will
prove what's going to happen. But
the management and and the the guy on
the shop floor, even the sales manager,
may have no impact on what actually
happens in the stock price. Yesterday,
Powell cuts rates. So, that moves the
company's price. All of a sudden, as an
employee, I'm better off or worse off,
but I had no effect on that. I had no
nothing to do with that. A new peer
enters the enters our business in our in
our as a new competitor. I have no
effect on that. All of a sudden, GDP
slows down. My business isn't even
affected cuz the GDP is tied more to
consumption problems. My business is a
B2B business that's totally outside of
being affected by current G GDP
movements, and my stock price price
falls. I had no control over that.
So, I think it it incentivizes what I
think the wrong thing is, and makes
people make preferential decisions,
which can manipulate the stock price,
which may or may not be good for the
company. So, do you adjust, I guess, for
options? You just consider them an
expense. How do you? I I think that, you
know, options are are super interesting
because a lot of companies that report
profit but they're not actually
profitable if you factor in the stock
options. And I had a friend who actually
put me on to this about 10 years ago,
and I was visiting his factory. He
doesn't give us stock options. I was
like, "Well, how do you compete?" He's
like, "Well,
I I mean, I hire the best people, and
you know, they tell me they they have
stock options at their company, and it's
public company. I'll give you the
options on their company." Ooh, on their
stock.
>> On their stock, and not my company or my
stock, and I'll pay you in cash, and
I'll give you a cash bonus.
And so, this is how he recruited all the
best people. Wow. And one of the
interesting things about this was after
that meeting, I was like, I wonder where
if I went fishing, you know, like you
talk about fishing a pond, right? Yeah.
And if I could increase the ratio of
what I'm looking at to be solid. And so,
I look for companies that stopped stock
options.
And there's not many of them, but when
you find one, it's usually like a good
place to start looking for an
investment. Yeah, that's a that's a good
point.
What do you think of other incentives
and inside companies? Such as? I don't
know. Like, what else drives sort of
like a lot of other good or bad
incentives? Like, what do you you if you
only had access to financial reporting,
management reporting, conference calls,
like, what are the things on the calls
that you would look for? What are the
things I'm going to look for Okay, so,
to answer your question is about what
are what incentives do I think are are
make sense? Well, you look at what the
key measures of success are for the
company, and do those align with
investors' interest. So, investors are
care about the company's longevity, its
ability to generate cash, its ability to
grow and sustain itself. And if the
company's incentives aren't linked to
that, so, if they're not tied to, you
know, cost control, if they're not tied
to
driving revenues from an organic
standpoint, not just from acquisitions,
um if they're not, you know, if they're
if they're tied if they're driven by
acquisition, but with no care to what's
going on on the balance sheet,
um that's a problem. I would say, you
know, it's it's not easy to say that
there's I hate I'm sorry, but the one
here's the one thing and then it's going
to work. But I think it it's one where
is it consistent? Did it change? Did a
company say, you know, "We're going to
pay management on X performance metric.
If they hit it, they get 100%. If they
don't, they get some graduated scale."
Well, then management doesn't hit it,
and they change the the metric, and
management still gets a bonus. I think
that's a problem. Oh, totally. Because
now what that does is it says that that
everything's okay. Mhm. And you know,
it's hard, again, now I'm a board. See,
the the more you learn and the more
experience you have, you understand more
about
what you don't know, and that there's a
lot of things to learn. Well, the board
is making these decisions, and they
everybody Oh, the board's bad, and
boards are bad. It's like, well, no, the
board wants to retain the CEO. And often
times, you know, that could be a very
significant personality.
And that personality may you know,
there's other companies that want that
individual to work there. So, they have
to retain them. And often times, money
is is is retaining. That's something
that becomes a problem. What is the role
of the board? The role of the board is
to embrace the position
and and the and the viewpoint of the
shareholder and or the stakeholder. I We
always always focus on the shareholder,
but stakeholder. Stakeholders employees,
uh customers,
the communities the company works in,
the competitors,
and embrace each of those, and ensure
that the company is making decisions or
that the executive is making decisions
in the best interests of those
stakeholders. Often times, they just
focus on, you know, shareholder value.
Mhm. Well, what is shareholder value? Is
that just something that we can
calculate on the financial statements or
calculate into the stock price? Or is
that that they've built a vibrant
employee base that is growing and
everybody has a great culture that
regardless of what's going to happen in
the stock price, they're going to get
through it.
Are they focused on, uh, you know, in
the in the communities in which they
operate and ensuring that they sustain
themselves because if they're just
milking that community or that
environment wherever they're working,
well, then what happens when they
finished milking it? Are the is that
business going to be able to continue?
And so, it's something I've spoken on
before this and I I so, I think it's
more than just shareholder value
calculated that way. How do you think
most board members get selected?
Often times, uh, by relationships.
Going back to humans run companies.
That's correct.
>> I'm going to ask you to be on my board
if I like you, think you're going to
agree with me. And you know, look, we we
have, uh,
a board. We also have a a found a board
on our foundation and I want to bring on
people that are going to make us better.
Mhm. That might mean that some
conversations are not always yes,
Anthony. Yes, Anthony. I I like I
actually don't want that. I want even in
my my own partners or my own employees.
I I welcome. Please come in. The door's
open. Tell me what I'm doing wrong.
We're not going to get better. I'm not
going to get better if someone doesn't
tell me I'm I'm I'm doing something
wrong. That is an uncommon view.
But it's the only way to progress, I
believe. I'm not saying that we're going
to decide what you said, but I want to
hear it.
If you don't And and then and the danger
they say, "Well, if you listen to it and
then don't do anything about it, then
it's like you disregarded it." I said,
"No, you listen to it and you go back to
the person. Thanks for the input. Here's
what we've decided to do as a result of
what you've said." Yeah. And then they
feel like they were part of it. What do
you think of the rise of indexing? I
think it's What are they I don't know
the exact stat, but the huge percentage
of money now is is passively invested in
ETFs of one form or another. And we've
never seen this concentration invested
in say, blindly cuz I mean, indexing
works though and it works it has worked
over a long period of time. Again, you
know, the price creates, uh, narrative.
And so, if indexing works, then why not
do it? The danger, I think, we're having
of the index investing passive investing
is that in essence, all that is is
momentum investing because it's a you're
buying index which is market cap
weighted.
So, the money that you're investing is
going to the largest market cap
companies. Those companies continue to
grow. They drag the index higher.
You know, there's really two indexes.
There's the Mag 7 and the sloppy 493.
And then so, if you look at the earnings
expectations of the sloppy 493 for this
year, there's virtually no growth.
But if you look at the growth of the Mag
7, it continues to go higher.
And so, I think that the the danger is
that if that reverses, I'm not saying
it's going to reverse, but if that
slows,
then all of a sudden, what's been
dragging the index higher will drag the
index
lower
in the same veracity.
Mhm. Because they are the largest cap.
So, if, you know, if one of the large if
Microsoft were to miss and I'm not
saying they're going to miss anything,
but if they if their earning growth
slows,
>> Right. all of a sudden, the stock falls.
Like we saw this in April, right? We saw
this huge drawdown in a very short
period of time. You know, what the thing
about those drawdowns because each of
the drawdowns that drawdown occurred
because Trump put together a tablet.
He came down from Mount Olympus,
brought down a tablet, right? I have a
picture of it that I use in my
presentations and showed how much the
ta- the tariff he was going to charge on
all these countries.
And that created immediate fear in the
market, right? Costs of companies were
going to go up. Transactions were going
to go down. Revenues get hurt. Margins
get hurt. Stock prices get hammered.
But what the the second, third level
thinking on that is, "But wait a minute.
These haven't been enacted. Yeah.
There's still time.
Maybe they don't happen.
And if they don't happen,
well, maybe all this drawdown doesn't
mean anything." Yeah. So, it's like an
exog- exogenous impact on the market. It
wasn't something that the market fell on
itself. Mhm. What I think would cause a
a more
a a downturn
similar more like what happened in '08
or even even in the early 2000s, like
people forget that in the early 2000s or
the 2000 crash. Well, actually, the
market was lower in '23 '03 than it was
in 2000. But everyone thinks that it
happened in 2000. It actually didn't. It
began. It's like that's when it started.
Right.
>> kept going.
>> for years. And the other ones have been
relatively fast. Even in the financial
crisis, that one That one actually the
peak was in '07.
In September '07, that was the peak and
the bottom was March '09. That's a lot
of That's a lot of pain. That's 18
months of pain. If you look at what what
I think could make this one be a a
longer one if it if something were to
occur is it comes from earnings slowing
down. Mhm. And earnings growth slowing
down,
that would be something that would take
longer to repair, especially when a lot
of the earnings are interconnected as I
talked about cuz the companies are
dealing with each other. It's not like
one thing you can, you know, you have
this band-aid you rip it off. It's like
the slow Yes. Yes. reorienting.
>> we've seen there there's meaningful
changes that are going on here, right?
Like Lululemon is trading at a low much
lower price today than it was last year.
Let's talk about stock buybacks. Share
count doesn't necessarily go down, but
buybacks are happening. It's the same as
stock options.
In a sense, and the disparity between
reality, economic reality, and what's
going on in the accounting. So, when you
buy back stock, the company is making a
investment in a security Mhm. which it
partially has control over what it does,
but it doesn't have full control over
what happens to that investment value.
Whereas, if it takes its cash
and buys an an operating asset that
expands its current production, and if
it's already generating a meaningful
return, then that return should continue
and expand.
So, to me, it's a dis- it's a point that
says, "I have no other investments
in my business
that would generate a return
higher than my cost of capital. And so,
I'm going out and buying my stock."
And I think that is very risky. How
should investors look at that or account
for that? I'm not so concerned about the
accounting. Well, that's stock buybacks.
So, if you're saying it's an investment
though, I understand. Yeah. So, I I
think what they should do is they should
look at earnings
on a
pre-EPS.
So, look at the earnings that the
company's generating before you divide
it by the number of shares to see is
that number growing Okay.
>> relative to the revenues.
Right. Because now you're seeing, uh,
is it or is it just coming from a
reduction of stock price number of
shares outstanding? And if the company's
taking on debt,
here's the classic example.
Company generates uh, the company
borrows money to buy back stock. Why?
Cuz because it's such an
highly perceived value company and
generates cash, it can borrow money and
at a very low price and invest it in the
in its own stock which has historically
generated a greater return than how much
it has to pay in debt.
Well, this works until it doesn't.
Because if for some reason, the business
changes or just slows its growth,
which could be just a natural evolution.
Like part of this is the law of large
numbers. Okay.
And if this happens, then all of a
sudden, that debt doesn't go away. And
what looked like a very low cost is now
a meaningful cost that doesn't leave.
And I look at Apple and this is what
concerns me.
Revenues are growing
minimal.
And yet, it generates meaningful cash
because it has a brand.
People are still willing to pay
8 $2,000 for a new phone.
There's a lot of competitors.
And I'm not sure that that will continue
forever at the same rate. In fact, it's
already slowing.
And that debt that they've taken on to
buy all back all those shares to
generate that EPS growth,
that could end up being a problem. If
they instead took that money and went
out and bought businesses, operating
businesses within its network that would
ensure its sustainability, and it's been
doing some of that, but continually do
that.
Imagine if it if it just kept the cash.
And all of a sudden, a business that it
always wanted to buy suffered a bad
quarter, and it bought it.
It's very difficult. When you have a lot
of cash, cash is king. Cash is power.
You know,
we've been talking, and again, it goes
to one of my rules about being negative
sounds smart. When if the market falls,
uh or or suffers some kind of setback,
you shouldn't be concerned. You
shouldn't be You shouldn't be scared.
In fact, I I did a trip to China.
Uh life-changing, practically. Earlier
this year, I'd never been before. And um
when I went to China, I If you go and
they're in the and I
met with analysts there and taught them
our our training process.
And if you When they when they look at
their screen, stocks that are down are
green. Stocks that are up are red.
That's how you should rejig your screen.
In fact, I've called FactSet and
Bloomberg and see if we can change that.
Because if you look Wake up every day
and everything's red, and you like do we
live this in '08, right? It went lower
and you thought, "Okay, I'll buy some
now." And then it went lower through
early 2000s, and then it went lower
until You don't know what that feels
like until you go through it. But
imagine if every day it was green. You
go, "Oh,
this is interesting."
And if every day it was going up, it was
red, you'd go, "Hmm, I'm not sure. Is
this okay? Is everything okay?" It might
be, but it's just Everything's a
mindset, right? They talk about, you
know,
the
habits, right? Developing habits and
that and of course that famous book. I I
love that. And you know, you you want to
do small things, right? Develop I put
your shoes over there so you remember to
put them on there. And then put beside
the shoes something that you need to
shine the shoes right there. But that
way you shine them before you leave. Why
do you think so few people
Like everybody talks like Buffett, and
then a situation like 2008 comes along,
and people were paralyzed.
>> He had cash. But he wasn't paralyzed.
>> Why could he act and other people To me,
it's it's
it's it's goes back to something we've
already touched on, and that is the
natural agency issues related with money
management industry. My investors give
me their money so I can make a return
that is hopefully better
than they could make investing
passively. If it doesn't end up being
that, they decide to take it away from
me. Mhm. And then I don't have any
money. Buffett has built a business
that generates cash. So he has operating
businesses,
Geico,
Fruit of the Loom, etc. These generate
cash. He takes that cash and invests it
when he wants to invest it
in the way that he wants to invest it.
You know, the average portfolio manager
can't do that because they're tied to
They have to Like today in the
investment management industry,
portfolio managers are measured like on
a daily basis. They If you're investing
in my funds, you can look right now and
see how we're doing versus the index
every second. Yeah. Why you down today?
My You know, my partner that started the
business with me says, "I don't know cuz
there was more sellers than buyers
today. I don't know." Any number And And
someone that tells you they can know
exactly why, unless there was some
announcement. And even when there was an
announcement, it was the interpretation
of the announcement that led to the
stock price falling, not the
announcement itself.
One of the things that we've sort of hit
on here without naming it is how
important structure is
to investing. Part of the reason that
Berkshire was able to do that and
Buffett was able to act is that or
Buffett's able to do what he's doing
today is he controls so much of the
shares. So he's got the structure to
enable the strategy to play out.
Whereas, if you think about it, you
know, there's many times during
Berkshire's
uh long career where
an investor, an activist investor, would
have come in, demanded the return
capital,
demanded to take on debt to buy back
shares, and the structure that's enabled
so much success has also prevented that.
I think about structure a lot in terms
of not only being positioned, so having
cash, and you know, being the master of
your own fate, or what Buffett said,
"Never want to rely on the kindness of
strangers." Yes. Uh especially when I
need them. Yes. And so like I think
about that, and I think positioning
anybody looks like a genius when they're
in a good position, and even a smart
person looks like an idiot when they're
in a bad position. Yep. And then you
think about structure and how that
aligns with the companies and what
you're trying to do, and you know, like
it's similar to how I invest. I don't
have a fund. I don't have outside
investors. So why? Cuz I don't like that
structure. I don't want to answer to
other people. I don't want to And if I
want to save up money for 3 years and do
nothing, then I can do that. And if I
want to chuck 80% of it into an
investment, I can do that.
>> Yes. So the structure enables my style
of how I proceed with investing. And I
think that those are very underrated
when we think of public companies cuz
you have a time a structural mismatch.
So that's the first thing you look at is
the structure and the control
environment. Yeah. And so you have
shareholders who have increasingly, you
know, it's gone from years to probably
quarters,
>> seconds, whatever you want to call it
now.
The average CEO tenure is is very short.
Yeah. Uh and I I sort of like Maybe the
analogy is bad, but I think about this
in the context of sports, right? Like if
I'm a head coach, I'm going into an 0
and 17 team in the NFL,
I'm going to take risks, and I'm going
to do things that
may or may not work out, uh but it's not
going to be status quo.
And I could leave the situation worse
than I found it. Uh but what I'm not
going to do is just try to make it
incrementally better. I I I think your
analogy is fantastic, and it's and it's
why, you know, I
I I I played hockey and football in in
my life, and uh I I love hockey. I you
know, big huge Leaf fan, and watch watch
the games and so on. But I watch more
NFL. I will watch teams that I have zero
interest in watching,
um and not because of the not because
the betting, but because any It's one
game. They only play 17 games. There is
one semi-final game. And if they lose,
they're done. Yeah. And their career
could be over because the NFL career is
so short. Yeah. And And so whereas in
hockey, you got seven games.
Like, okay, guys, you know, second
period, we're down five. Okay, it's game
two. We're good. Okay, like we got this.
Settle down. Let's get ready. We play in
a couple of days.
So what I see happening in these
situations is like the new coach going
into the bad team will overspend on free
agents.
Yep. Uh they will leverage the future.
Yeah, put themselves in a bad position
in salary cap wise in 5 years. Yep. And
it's almost under the assumption that
I'm probably not going to be the coach
in 5 years. Yep. But this will make us
immediately better. I can show tangible
progress. And I have a hope of But I've
screwed myself from year five to 100%.
>> You know, forward. We talked about the
impact to passive investing.
I would say that
passive investing has always been there.
Okay? Mhm. What I think the more
meaningful, important impact on
investing today is the power of the
retail. I watched that movie called
Stupid Money, was it called?
>> Mhm.
Uh with Hello Kitty and Oh, yeah, yeah.
That was great. Um That is You know,
these are movies. They're fantastic.
Yeah. Because And the I love the word
fantastic. We haven't yet said it yet,
but cuz it's something supernatural.
It's something that is both good and
bad, and it changed something. And so
what that really exposed is the power of
the retail investor. Yeah.
And today, the retail investor as a
component of total investment is the
largest it's ever been.
And the other thing that's interesting
is that the prevalence of all and how
easy it is for the retail investor to
have just the same information, and
maybe even better, I don't know, but to
have access to both technical
technical, looking at charts,
fundamental, looking at actual financial
information, social media stuff, access
to that in any way that I could get
Yeah. at very low cost. So when I
started in the industry in 1999,
okay? And just think of Buffett. He'll
tell you the story of he used to read
the financial statements, and he used to
get the chart the old charts, and look
at them. And no one was doing that.
Yeah. They weren't paying attention.
Even even investor in in institutional
investors. And the retail investor was
hardly paying attention. We just
learning on dial-up. Oh, I remember
that. And you could trade, but you you'd
have to call in your trade, right? And
wait in line for someone. Or And then it
started online, but it was really slow,
and you didn't get good information, and
you didn't get great fills. Now you have
Interactive Brokers. That platform that
you get is unbelievable. And all the
other all the other comparatives that
are coming up that's empowering that
retail investor. So
this is creating a significant
short-term
focus.
There are day options, okay? Traded all
the time. Someone told me that in Tesla,
there is more transactions on options
than there are in dollar value on the
actual stock in the day.
>> Oh, interesting. The option market is we
could do a whole discussion
on all the subtleties of the stock
market that people don't know. When an
option is sold, someone has to sell it
to them. Well, that's typically the
broker, the market maker, sells that
option.
They try to sell it off to somebody
else, but if they can't get the other
side, well, then they stuck holding it.
Now, most options expire worthless until
they don't. If something actually
happens and the price rises on the stock
and you've bought calls, now the broker
needs to sell like needs to act to make
that money to pay you for that option.
And typically they're going to start
acting on the stock itself to hedge
themselves. Mhm. They'll buy the stock
because if your calls are going up in
the stock cuz the stock's going up,
well, I want to buy the stock so that
I'm hedged. As the calls go up, I'm also
hedged with the stock price moving.
Well, that just creates more momentum
for the stock price to go higher. And so
that is that I think is also causing big
swings. Like, you know, we're looking at
on a daily basis during earning season,
stocks move. Like it used to be 1 or 2%.
Now we're looking at 20% moves in a day.
Oracle moved 20%. That was like on I
don't recall the exact number, but that
move those were valuations of entire
companies.
>> It was almost 40%. Mhm. So, you think
about that and yet we're in a period of
AI. Yeah. We're in a period where there
are drones. Now, for Oracle's business,
drones might not help, but think about
Lululemon. Drones looking at at what's
being sold, what's being
where traffic is. You're you have access
and you can buy access to credit card
data. You can get you can talk to
suppliers. There's all these expert
networks that you can talk to like
individuals working in the industry or
used to work in the industry. They'll
give you all this inside but not inside
type information. And so yet all of that
is happening and Oracle stock price
moves 40%
on news. And we have access to better
and supposedly better information than
we've ever had.
How does that make any sense? If we had
better information, then you know what?
Stock prices on news would hardly move.
Everybody would already have known. It'd
be fully priced in. Correct. So, therein
lies the interesting point where, you
know, they think that AI is going to
beat us
as investors. I say bring it. It's all
good. Bring it. It's just a tool. We're
still human. It's a tool. It doesn't
have judgment.
It doesn't have the ability to, you
know, make decisions on past links that
unless it unless that link that it drew.
But you don't even know what link it
drew. Well, as of today, I guess that
the potential is that it it supersedes
individual and collective intelligence.
And so it gets to a point where it's
able to do that. I guess that's the
Maybe. Yeah. We'll see. Yeah. That's a
great place to end this. We always end
with the same question, which is a life
question for you and a personal
question, but what is success for you?
Uh success is achieving something that
I can share with those that I love and
care about, my family and my friends.
And my and my employees and and and my
customers. I I think that's
the success, whether it's in sport, it's
achieving something that I can share. Um
because if I can't share it,
you know, I I I learned the code long
ago that uh
happiness can only be shared. Mhm. From
my late pastor priest Paul Cusack, we'll
give him a shout out. He was awesome.
And so if you can achieve something and
share it, uh then it then it's real
success. And I think uh
winning has to be something that that is
everything. It has to be it has to you
have to be focused on on achieving
something, then nothing else can get in
the way. Big shout out to that book
Winning.
Uh I'm sure you looked at that book from
Tim Tim Grover.
Uh that that's that's such a pivotal
study.
This is a great way to end this
conversation. Thank you so much,
Anthony, for taking the time today. It's
my pleasure, Shane.
>> [music]